JCasC page in "Managing Jenkins" (#4752)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/book/managing/casc.adoc

---
title: Jenkins Configuration as Code (JCasC)
layout: section
wip: true
---

The Jenkins Configuration as Code (JCasC) feature defines Jenkins configuration parameters
in a human-readable YAML file that can be stored under source code.
This essentially captures the configuration parameters and values that are used when configuring Jenkins from the web UI.
The configuration can then be modified by editing this file and then applying it.

Configuring and tuning Jenkins and its plugins is a complex process,
with dozens of parameters to set within the web UI `manage` section.

> Traditionally, experienced Jenkins administrators

Reviewer: JCasC has been around for years at this point, not sure if this is required anymore, you could possibly drop this paragraph

Reviewer 2: Project started in 2017.
v1 release in 2019: https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/releases/tag/configuration-as-code-1.0

Author: I didn't like that first sentence but was trying to be respectful of what is in the current docs...  I've deleted the first sentence and turned the info about using Groovy .init scripts into a NOTE.  It seems worth mentioning for someone who might wonder if they can still do that.

created Apache Groovy `init` scripts
to automate the configuration for their Jenkins instances.
This works but requires in-depth understanding of Jenkins APIs
and the ability to write Groovy scripts.
Such scripts are powerful and can do almost anything,
but they also provide few protections against configuration errors.
====

JCasC provides the convenience and flexibility
of configuring controllers without using the UI.
It does not require more understanding of the configuration parameters
than is required to configure Jenkins through the UI
and it provides some checks on the values that are provided.

The JCasC configuration file can be checked into an SCM,
which enables you to determine who made what modifications to the configuration
and to roll back to a previous configuration if necessary.

The
link:https://plugins.jenkins.io/configuration-as-code[Configuration as Code] plugin
must be installed on the Jenkins controller
that you will use to build out your JCasC configuration.
If you do not see the *Configuration as Code* tile
in the *System Configuration* section
of the *Manage Jenkins* page on your dashboard,
you need to install the plugin.

> == Viewing the JCasC File

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)
```suggestion
== Viewing the JCasC file
```

> but the Docker image in the

Reviewer: the docker image doesn't contain it but the helm chart does

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it should, but that's a different discussion 🗡️

Author: Maybe I'm being too specific here anyhow.  I'm just going to say that the plugin must be installed and let it go at that -- details about how that happened are actually irrelevant, aren't they?

Author: No good reason to go down this rabbit hole in this document, right?  Check "Manage Jenkins" -- if you don't see Configuration as Code", you need to install it.  That seems like all we need to say.  Done.

== Viewing the JCasC File

When the Configuration as Code plugin is installed,
you will see *Configuration as Code* in the *System Configuration* section
of the *Manage Jenkins* page on your dashboard.
Click on this link,
then click on *View Configuration*
to view the YAML file.

This file is an export of the current configuration on this controller.

> It is *not* intended to offer a directly-usable Jenkins YAML configuration;

Reviewer: this warning isn't worded the best, it's a bit out of date, generally it doesn't fail for any components these days at least not any mainstream ones. (I get that this is copied from the plugin)

There's certain edge cases which mean you may not be able to round trip it but generally the configuration you receive will work.

Author: Note that Darin's video about configuring Jenkins with Ansible and JCasC says this, too.

Here, I reworded it to say that it is usually ready to deploy although you probably want to customize it.  And advise that they push the file to the SCM before making modifications so it is preserved for history.

You may, however, want to push the unmodified version to SCM
so you have it as part of your history.

[NOTE]
====
The *Configuration as Code* UI page shows the full pathname of the YAML file being used
and gives a box where you can specify a different file to use.
See the information below about how to modify the location used for JCasC YAML files.
====

The default JCasC YAML file has four sections:

* `jenkins` section defines the root Jenkins object,
with configurations that can be set with the
*Manage Jenkins >> Configure System*
and *Manage Jenkins >> Configure Nodes and Clouds* screens.

* `tool` section defines build tools that can be set on the
*Manage Jenkins >> Global Tool Configuration* screen.

> * *unclassified* section defines all other configuration,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* *unclassified* section defines all other configurations,
```

> * *unclassified* section definies miscellaneous configurations,

Reviewer: I would put unclassified last
```suggestion
* *unclassified* section defines all other configuration,
```

including configuration for installed plugins.

* `credentials` section defines credentials that can be set on the
*Manage Jenkins >> Manage Credentials* screen.
You may want to delete this section from your YAML file;
this is discussed beginning at 27:53 in
link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ANU7jkxbZSM[How to Install Jenkins on CentOS 7 Using Ansible and JCasC].

> == YAML File Syntax

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)
```suggestion
== YAML file syntax
```

JCasC defines the controller configuration in a YAML file.
YAML is a popular serialization language for configuration information,

> with a syntax is straight-forward and easy to read but precise.

Reviewer 5: This formulation "with is a" is strange

Author: ```suggestion
with a syntax that is straight-forward and easy to read but precise.
```

Some key points about YAML syntax:

* YAML files are case sensitive.
* Indentation is very significant and specific.
* Each item is a key/value pair.

> ** The key is followed by a colon (:) and a space.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
** The key is followed by a colon (`:`) and a space.
```

** YAML converts certain strings into other types unless they are in quotes.

> *** true, false, Yes, No, et cetera are converted to Boolean values.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
*** `true`, `false`, `Yes`, `No`, et cetera are converted to Boolean values.
```
Not sur what "et cetera" can be

Author: Could have TRUE and True and maybe T.  But you are right -- "et cetera" is weak prose here.  I rewrote it to be parallel to the item about Booleans.

> *** Values such as 2 and 3.0 are converted to floating point values.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
*** Values such as `2` and `3.0` are converted to floating point values.
```

* A value can be a list:
** Each list item is on a separate line starting with a dash (`-`).
** Each list item in the file must start at the same indentation.
*** Use spaces, never tabs, for indentation.
** Never leave a blank line in a YAML file -- things will break!

See the
link:https://yaml.org/refcard.html[YAML Reference Card]
for more details about YAML file syntax.

== Checking the *.yaml File into SCM

To get the maximum benefit of JCasC, the YAML files should be stored in SCM.
This gives you a history that you can use to trace changes that are made
and allow you to easily roll back to an earlier version of the file if necessary.

JCasC does not require that the file be stored in SCM
and so does not enforce any rules about how you do this.
The most common practice is to create one SCM repository
in which you store all of your JCasC files.

If you are storing your JCasC YAML files in SCM,
you should commit the first default file that is generated,
before you make any modifications to the file.

> == Modifying the JCasC File

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)

```suggestion
== Modifying the JCasC file
```

To modify the JCasC YAML file,
use the text editor of your choice to edit the file
that is listed on the *Manage Jenkins >> Configuration as Code* UI page.
By default, this is _$JENKINS_HOME/jenkins.yaml_.

For a simple exercise to work through the process,
you can modify the value of the "System Message"
that is displayed on the Jenkins dashboard.

. Open the JCasC YAML file with the text editor of your choice.
. Find the `systemMessage` line near the top of the file:
+
[source,yaml]
----
jenkins:
  systemMessage: "Jenkins configured automatically by Jenkins Configuration as Code plugin\n\n"
----

> . Modify the text between the quotation marks to contain your new text.
> . Write/save the file.
> . Click the *Reload existing configuration* button to apply the changes.
> . View the modified "System Message" on your dashboard.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Modify the text between the quotation marks to contain your new text
. Write/save the file
. Click the *Reload existing configuration* button to apply the changes
. View the modified "System Message" on your dashboard
```
Removed hard stop at the end of list items

[NOTE]
====
It is not necessary to restart Jenkins to apply the JCasC changes,
although you should try to restart Jenkins with the modifications
before you check the modified YAML file into SCM,
especially when making more substantive configuration changes.
====

When you have made and tested your desired changes,
push the modified JCasC YAML file to your SCM.

> == Configuring a Plugin with JCasC

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)

```suggestion
== Configuring a plugin with JCasC
```

To configure a plugin with JCasC:

> . Use the UI of the current system to install and configure the plugin.
> . Click *Apply >> Save* to save the configuration.
> . Use *Manage Jenkins >> Configuration as Code >> View Configuration*
> to view the JCasC file with the plugin configured.
> . Click on *Download Configuration*  to save the modified configuration file locally.
> . Edit the JCasC YAML file to modify the configuration, if necessary.
> Save the file.
> . Click *Reload existing configuration* to load the local changes onto the Jenkins server.
> . Verify the changes on the UI.
> . When you have thoroughly tested the plugin configuration,
> push the modified YAML file to your SCM.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
. Use the UI of the current system to install and configure the plugin
. Click *Apply >> Save* to save the configuration
. Use *Manage Jenkins >> Configuration as Code >> View Configuration*
to view the JCasC file with the plugin configured
. Click on *Download Configuration*  to save the modified configuration file locally
. Edit the JCasC YAML file to modify the configuration, if necessary
. Save the file
. Click *Reload existing configuration* to load the local changes onto the Jenkins server
. Verify the changes on the UI
. When you have thoroughly tested the plugin configuration,
push the modified YAML file to your SCM
```
Removed hard stop at the end of list items

See the
link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2021/05/20/configure-plugins-with-jcasc/[Configure Plugins with JCasC]
blog for detailed instructions
and an embedded video demonstration of this process.

> == YAML File Location

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)

```suggestion
== YAML file location
```

By default, the YAML file for the CasC configuration
is located in `$JENKINS_HOME/jenkins.yaml`.
The location and name of the file being used is displayed
on the *Configuration as Code* UI page.
You can specify a different file to view by typing the full pathname
into the *Path or URL* field.

You can specify a different location or a different file name
for the creation of the JCasC YAML file by doing either of the following:

* Populate the `CASC_JENKINS_CONFIG` environment variable to point to
a comma-separated list that defines where configuration files are located.

* Use the `casc.jenkins.config` Java property to control the file name and location.
This is useful when installing Jenkins via a package management tool.

> It can not set an environment variable outside of a package-managed file,
> because it could be overwritten by an update.

Reviewer 3: I'm not clear on this phrasing.  Is this guiding the reader to modify files that are not controlled by the package manager so that later updates by the package manager won't overwrite the files?  If that's the case, could it be rephrased as
```suggestion
Most package management systems support configuration files that will be retained across upgrades.
It is best to not modify a file installed by a package manager
because it could be overwritten by an update.
```

+
[source,bash]
----
`-Dcasc.jenkins.config=/jenkins/casc_configs`
----

The file location and name can be specified as any of the following:

* Path to a folder containing a set of config files such as `/var/jenkins_home/casc_configs`.
* A full path to a single file such as `/var/jenkins_home/casc_configs/jenkins.yaml`.
* A URL pointing to a file served on the web such as `https://acme.org/jenkins.yaml`.

The value of the `CASC_JENKINS_CONFIG` variable is unpacked
according to the following rules:

* If an element of `CASC_JENKINS_CONFIG` points to a folder,
the plugin recursively traverses the folder to find file(s)
with the .yml, .yaml, .YAML, or .YML suffix.

* It excludes hidden files or files that contain a hidden folder
(such as/ `jenkins/casc_configs/.dir1/config.yaml`)
in **any part** of the full path.

* It follows symbolic links for both files and directories.

* The order of traversal does not matter to the final outcome
because all configuration files that are discovered MUST be supplementary.
If a file attempts to overwrite configuration values from another file,
it creates a conflict and raises a `ConfiguratorException`.

> === CasC Configuration and UI Modifications

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)

```suggestion
=== CasC configuration and UI modifications
```

Configuration for a Jenkins controller should be implemented
either with CasC or with the UI, but not by both.
By default, the system allows you to use the UI
to modify configuration options that were configured by CasC,
but these modifications are overwritten the next time the controller restarts.

To ensure that configuration changes are not made through the UI,
install and enable the
link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/05/25/read-only-jenkins-announcement/[Read-only Jenkins Configuration]
plugin.
When this plugin is installed,
all configuration fields set by JCasC display as read-only values
that cannot be modified through the UI.

> == For More Information

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)

```suggestion
== For more information
```

> === General Information

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)

```suggestion
=== General information
```

* link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=47D3H1BZi4o[Look Ma! No Hands! -- Manage Jenkins Configuration as Code]
is a video of the 2018 DevOps World presentation
that introduced the JCasC feature.

* link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2021/05/20/configure-plugins-with-jcasc/[Configure Plugins with JCasC]

> is a blog post with video that demonstrates how to set the JCasC configuration of a plugin.

Reviewer 3: Optional alternate phrasing for you to consider
```suggestion
is a blog post with video that demonstrates how to configure a plugin with JCasC.
```

Reviewer 4: A small suggestion
> Optional alternate phrasing for you to consider

```suggestion
is a blog post with a video that demonstrates how to set the JCasC configuration of a plugin.
```

* link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ANU7jkxbZSM[How to Install Jenkins on CentOS 7 Using Ansible and JCasC]
is a video presentation with details about using JCasc.

=== Implementation details

Much of the detailed JCasC documentation is provided in the
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/tree/master/docs[Github repository].

** link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/blob/master/docs/IMPLEMENTATION.md[Implementation details]

* The
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/tree/master/demos[demos] 
directory contains sample _*.yaml_ files for configuring specific Jenkins components and plugins,
with a _README_ file in each directory that describes the configurations for that component.

> * link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/blob/master/docs/seed-jobs.md[How to create initial "seed" job]

Reviewer 3: (Optional) Maybe clarify that the concept of a "seed job" is strongly connected with Job DSL plugin?

```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/blob/master/docs/seed-jobs.md[How to create the initial "seed" job with Job DSL]
```

* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/blob/master/docs/usageScenarios.md[Usage scenarios]

* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/blob/master/docs/features/configurationReload.md[Triggering Configuration Reload]

* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/blob/master/docs/features/configExport.md[Exporting configurations]

> === Information for Plugin Developers and Maintainers

Reviewer 3: The [style guide](https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/STYLEGUIDE.adoc#assorted-comments) requests sentence case the "titles" (I interpret that to mean "headings", but that is not a consistent usage throughout the documents, for sure) (optional)

```suggestion
=== Information for plugin developers and maintainers
```

---
title: Configuration as Code
layout: section

> wip: true

Reviewer 3: No longer a work in progress
```suggestion
```

. Save the file
. Click *Reload existing configuration* to load the local changes onto the Jenkins server
. Verify the changes on the UI
. When you have thoroughly tested the plugin configuration,
push the modified YAML file to your SCM

See the
link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2021/05/20/configure-plugins-with-jcasc/[Configure Plugins with JCasC]
blog for detailed instructions
and an embedded video demonstration of this process.

== YAML file location

By default, the YAML file for the CasC configuration
is located in `$JENKINS_HOME/jenkins.yaml`.
The location and name of the file being used is displayed
on the *Configuration as Code* UI page.
You can specify a different file to view by typing the full pathname
into the *Path or URL* field.

You can specify a different location or a different file name
for the creation of the JCasC YAML file by doing either of the following:

* Populate the `CASC_JENKINS_CONFIG` environment variable to point to
a comma-separated list that defines where configuration files are located.

* Use the `casc.jenkins.config` Java property to control the file name and location.
This is useful when installing Jenkins via a package management tool.

> Most package management systems support configuration files that will be retained across upgrades.

Author: ```suggestion
Most package management systems support configuration files that are retained across upgrades.
```

* It excludes hidden files or files that contain a hidden folder
(such as/ `jenkins/casc_configs/.dir1/config.yaml`)
in **any part** of the full path.

* It follows symbolic links for both files and directories.

* The order of traversal does not matter to the final outcome
because all configuration files that are discovered MUST be supplementary.
If a file attempts to overwrite configuration values from another file,
it creates a conflict and raises a `ConfiguratorException`.

=== CasC configuration and UI modifications

Configuration for a Jenkins controller should be implemented
either with CasC or with the UI, but not by both.
The system allows administrators to modify configuration options on the UI
even when they were configured by CasC,
but these modifications are overwritten the next time the controller restarts.

You can install the
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/extended-read-permission-plugin[Extended Read Permission Plugin],
which allows you to grant read-only access to configuration parameters to users.
See
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/blob/master/jep/224/README.adoc[JEP-224: Readonly system configuration]
for more details.

> A small group of administrators must still have write access to the UI configuration fields,
> and they should understand that JCasC will overwrite changes they make on the UI.

Reviewer 3: Alternative phrasing
```suggestion
A small group of administrators may have write access to the UI configuration fields .
They should understand that JCasC will overwrite changes they make on the UI.
```

Configuration for a Jenkins controller should be implemented
either with CasC or with the UI, but not by both.
The system allows administrators to modify configuration options on the UI
even when they were configured by CasC,
but these modifications are overwritten the next time the controller restarts.

You can install the
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/extended-read-permission-plugin[Extended Read Permission Plugin],
which allows you to grant read-only access to configuration parameters to users.
See
link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/blob/master/jep/224/README.adoc[JEP-224: Readonly system configuration]
for more details.

> A small group of administrators must still have write access to the UI configuration fields,

Reviewer: I wouldn’t say must here.
